Add KEP-5999 for HTTP/2 cleartext (h2c) container probes (#6000)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5999-h2c-container-probes/README.md

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]

> - [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

Reviewer: Please make sure to check the appropriate boxes above.

Author: addressed

workloads into `exec` workarounds.

See the [upstream discussion](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125599)
for community experience reports motivating this enhancement.

### Goals

Enable HTTP/2 cleartext (h2c) container probes so apps are not forced to add a
separate HTTP/1.1-only probe port or rely on TCP.

### Non-Goals

- This KEP does not alter gRPC probes or ingress behavior.
- This KEP does not introduce a new top-level probe handler type.

## Proposal

Add a `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol` field to the existing `HTTPGetAction`
struct. When set to `HTTP2` (with the default `scheme: HTTP`), the kubelet
performs the HTTP GET over HTTP/2 cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c)
instead of the default HTTP/1.1. When nil or unset, behavior is unchanged
(HTTP/1.1), preserving full backward compatibility. The field is gated by
the `HTTPProbeProtocol` feature gate on both kube-apiserver (API validation)
and kubelet (probe execution).

This approach reuses the existing `httpGet` path, port, and header semantics
that operators already know, and is naturally extensible to future protocols
(e.g., HTTP/3).

> ### User Stories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### User Stories (Optional)
```
please don't change template, we have tooling build around it.

Author: fixed

> #### Story 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Story 1 (Optional)
```

As a platform engineer operating Kubernetes behind a TLS-terminating load
balancer, I want to configure liveness/readiness probes that speak HTTP/2
cleartext (h2c) to my app's main port, so that I don't have to run a second
HTTP/1.1-only port (with extra ingress rules and hardening) just to make probes
succeed.

> #### Story 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Story 2 (Optional)
```

As an application developer whose service listens with HTTP/2 without TLS inside
the cluster, I want the kubelet to perform a real HTTP health check
(status code on a path) over h2c, so that I am not forced to use a `tcpSocket`
probe that only proves the port is open and does not confirm a valid HTTP
response.

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)
```

- `protocol: HTTP2` is only valid with `scheme: HTTP` (the default). This
  KEP scopes to cleartext h2c only.
- When `protocol: HTTP2`, `host` must be empty (probe always targets pod IP,
  same rationale as `grpc`). Can be relaxed later if needed.

### Risks and Mitigations

> **HTTP/2 client dependency.** The standard library's built-in HTTP/2 support (`net/http`) is used for the h2c transport.

Reviewer: How using a standard library is a risk, can you explain? I believe using cleartext is the risk that should be explained here.

Author: agreed, removed the standard library  reference.

## Design Details

### API Design

A new `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol` field is added to `HTTPGetAction`. When
set to `HTTP2` (with the default `scheme: HTTP`), the kubelet performs the
HTTP GET over HTTP/2 cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c). When nil,
existing HTTP/1.1 behavior is preserved.

```go
// HTTPProbeProtocol selects the wire protocol for the HTTP probe,
// independently of the URI scheme.

> type HTTPProbeProtocol string

Reviewer: Suggestion: this could be called just `HTTPProtocol` to match other fields like `URIScheme` or `HTTPHeader`, etc.

Author: this is good , i have changed to   `HTTPProtocol`

const (
    // HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP1 uses HTTP/1.1 (the existing default).
    HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP1  HTTPProbeProtocol = "HTTP1"
    // HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2 uses HTTP/2.
    // Currently, only cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c) is supported, and must be used with scheme HTTP.
    HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2 HTTPProbeProtocol = "HTTP2"
)

type HTTPGetAction struct {
    Path        string             `json:"path,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=path"`
    Port        intstr.IntOrString `json:"port" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=port"`
    Host        string             `json:"host,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=host"`
    Scheme      URIScheme          `json:"scheme,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=scheme,casttype=URIScheme"`
    HTTPHeaders []HTTPHeader       `json:"httpHeaders,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,5,rep,name=httpHeaders"`

>     // Protocol selects the wire protocol. Nil defaults to HTTP/1.1.

Reviewer: There's a slight inconsistency. The allowed values for protocol are `HTTP1` and `HTTP2`, but you're claiming it defaults to `HTTP/1.1`. I know what you're trying to express, but we have to be explicit. You should either update the constants to match what you write, or the other way around.

Author: Fixed, the Go comment now says Nil defaults to HTTP1, referencing the constant name directly. natural language descriptions still use HTTP/1.1 when referring to the protocol itself .

    // +optional
    Protocol    *HTTPProbeProtocol `json:"protocol,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,6,opt,name=protocol,casttype=HTTPProbeProtocol"`
}
```

**`ProbeHandler` is unchanged**, the existing `httpGet` field carries the new
`protocol` sub-field.

**Example probe manifest:**

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpGet:
    port: 8080
    path: /readyz
    protocol: HTTP2
    httpHeaders:
      - name: Custom-Header
        value: my-value
  initialDelaySeconds: 5
  periodSeconds: 10
```

**Validation rules** (enforced only when `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is on at

> admission):

Reviewer: Using the admission here is confusing, write it `**Validation rules** (enforced only when `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is on)`

Author: fixed

- `protocol` must be one of `HTTP1`, `HTTP2`, or nil (defaults to HTTP/1.1).
- `protocol: HTTP2` requires `scheme: HTTP` (the default). Setting

>   `protocol: HTTP2` with `scheme: HTTPS` is rejected at admission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `protocol: HTTP2` with `scheme: HTTPS` is rejected during validation.
```

Author: fixed

- When `protocol: HTTP2` is set, `host` must be empty. The probe always

>   targets `status.podIP`. This is rejected at admission with a descriptive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targets `status.podIP`. This is rejected during validation with a descriptive
```

Reviewer: Also, to satisfy my own curiosity. Is setting the host strictly a HTTP/2 limitation?

Author: not a protocol limitation, HTTP/2 fully supports the,host. this is a deliberate safety constraint. The kubelet probe should only target the pod's own IP to avoid accidentally health-checking a different endpoint. gRPC probes follow the same pattern,they also disallow host overrides.

Reviewer: Yup, that makes total sense. Thank you!

  `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is off, the kubelet returns a probe failure with an
  explicit error message (no silent HTTP/1.1 downgrade).
- The h2c client uses HTTP/2 with prior knowledge (no HTTP/1.1 Upgrade
  negotiation), implemented via the standard library's `net/http` transport.
- A 2xx response code is success; any other response or connection error is
  failure, consistent with existing `httpGet` probe semantics.
- Probe timeout and period settings apply identically to other probe types.

#### Kubelet Probe Execution

In `pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go`, the kubelet reads the `Protocol` field:

```go
useHTTP2 := p.HTTPGet.Protocol != nil && *p.HTTPGet.Protocol == v1.HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2
```

This boolean is passed to the HTTP prober to select the transport.

#### HTTP/2 Cleartext Transport

In `pkg/probe/http/http.go`, an h2c transport is created alongside the
existing HTTP/1.1 transport:

```go
tr := &http.Transport{}
tr.Protocols = new(http.Protocols)
tr.Protocols.SetUnencryptedHTTP2(true)
client := &http.Client{Transport: tr}
```

`SetUnencryptedHTTP2(true)` enables HTTP/2 over cleartext (h2c) using the
standard library's built-in HTTP/2 support.

### Test Plan

> - [ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates

Reviewer: This needs to be checked.

Author: checked.

    `protocol: HTTP2`.
  - Probe a local h2c test server: 200 -> success, 500 -> failure, timeout ->
    failure, connection refused -> failure.
  - Verify HTTP/2 is actually used on the wire (not HTTP/1.1 downgrade).
  - `protocol: nil` -> unchanged HTTP/1.1 behavior.

- `pkg/apis/core/validation`:
  - Valid `httpGet` with `protocol: HTTP2`, numeric port, path, and headers ->
    allowed.
  - `protocol: HTTP2` + `scheme: HTTPS` -> rejected at admission.
  - `protocol: HTTP2` + `host` set -> rejected (host override not allowed
    with HTTP2).
  - `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate off -> `protocol` field silently dropped.
  - `protocol: nil` + `host` set → allowed (existing behavior unchanged).

- `pkg/kubelet/prober`:
  - Gate off + `protocol: HTTP2` set -> probe returns explicit failure (not
    silent HTTP/1.1).
  - Gate on + `protocol: HTTP2` -> kubelet uses h2c transport for the probe.
  - Gate on/off toggle: object admitted with gate on, gate turned off ->
    kubelet fails the probe clearly on next execution.

- `pkg/probe/http`: `2026-05-26` - `78.7%`
- `pkg/kubelet/prober`: `2026-05-26` - `79.8%`
- `pkg/apis/core/validation`: `2026-05-26` - `85.3%`

##### Integration tests

> Integration tests will be added.

Reviewer: Can you enumerate planned tests, the same way you did for unit and e2e tests?

Author: @soltysh is  this needed for alpha?

Reviewer: Yes, see [the template comments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/dbee6aabb2b1dbfcee18794a33889c0e7ccfc197/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md?plain=1#L317-L318). Unless, you're not planning any tests, then explain why it is so.

Author: added plan for integration tests.

##### e2e tests

- Liveness probe with `protocol: HTTP1` against an HTTP/1.1 server succeeds ->
  container is **not** restarted.
- Liveness probe with `protocol: HTTP2` against an HTTP/1.1-only server fails
  -> container **is** restarted (protocol mismatch).
- Liveness probe with `protocol: HTTP2` targeting a wrong port fails ->
  container **is** restarted (connection refused).

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- API field implemented and functional

> - Unit tests passing

Reviewer: I'd suggest both unit and integration tests here.

Author: added

- Documentation available

#### Beta

- No major bugs reported during alpha
- Gather feedback from users

#### GA

- Stable for at least two releases
- No major issues reported

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade:** Opt-in only. Existing pods are unaffected (`protocol` defaults to
nil = HTTP/1.1). Enable the `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate on both kube-apiserver
and kubelet to use the feature.

**Downgrade:** Probes with `protocol: HTTP2` fail explicitly, no silent
HTTP/1.1 fallback. Remove the `protocol` field from pod specs before

> disabling the gate to restore healthy probes.

Reviewer: I don't think that's correct. The protocol field is a new addition in 1.37, after a rollback to 1.36 the field is unknown, so both kubelet and apiserver will treat as if the field does not exist. So kubelet will silently fallback to http/1.1, no?

Reviewer: Given the above, I believe the correct way, and this is how we've always treated new things is to ignore the new field. If the pod is exposing only http/2 it will fail either way, if not it will work as before. But most importantly, I don't believe an administrator will be chasing all pods to modify their specs just to be able to roll the cluster back.

Author: i have modified this section , you can take a look.

### Version Skew Strategy

- **New apiserver (gate on), old kubelet:** Pod is admitted but the old kubelet
  ignores `protocol` and probes with HTTP/1.1. If the app only speaks HTTP/2,

>   the probe fails, safe but not useful.

Reviewer: I don't agree with "not useful" here. That's the way we roll new functionality, and ensure backwards compatibility. New functionality is always additive, so when the feature gate is off, it should be as if it did not exist.

Author: Agreed, removed "safe but not useful". Now reads:- This is the expected backward compatible behavior ,the feature behaves as if it did not exist.

- **New apiserver (gate off):** `protocol` is silently dropped at admission. No pods
  with the field reach any kubelet.
- **Both new, gate on apiserver / gate off kubelet:** Kubelet explicitly fails

>   the probe, no silent HTTP/1.1 fallback.

Reviewer: This is wrong, see my previous comment. The way this should work is what you described in the first point.

Author: fixed, the version skew section now says the kubelet silently ignores the field and falls back to HTTP/1.1 , no explicit failure.

- **Both new, gate on everywhere:** Fully operational.

> **Recommended:** Upgrade kubelets first, then enable the gate on kube-apiserver.

Reviewer: This is somewhat confusing, I'd say upgrade all components first (to match our recommendations for ordering upgrades see https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/cluster-upgrade/) and then enable the feature gate.

Author: thanks, updated to "Upgrade all components first (following the [standard cluster upgrade order](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/cluster-upgrade/)), then enable the feature gate."

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `HTTPProbeProtocol`
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - `kube-apiserver` (validation, field dropping)
    - `kubelet` (probe execution)

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. The `protocol` field defaults to nil, which preserves existing HTTP/1.1
probe behavior. Only pods that explicitly set `protocol: HTTP2` are affected.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. Disabling the gate on the apiserver prevents new pods from setting the
`protocol` field. Disabling the gate on the kubelet causes probes with
`protocol: HTTP2` to fail explicitly. Existing pods with `protocol: HTTP2` must

> have that field removed to restore healthy probes after rollback.

Reviewer: This is wrong, see my other comments.

Author: Fixed. The rollback answer now says the kubelet silently ignores the unknown field and falls back to HTTP/1.1. No manual pod spec changes are required.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

Pods that still carry `protocol: HTTP2` in their spec (admitted before rollback)
will resume h2c probing automatically. No data is lost or corrupted; the field
is purely declarative.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Yes. Unit tests in `pkg/apis/core/validation` and `pkg/kubelet/prober` cover:
- Gate off: `protocol` field silently dropped, kubelet fails probe explicitly
  if the field was previously persisted.
- Gate on then off: previously admitted pods with `protocol: HTTP2` get explicit
  probe failures, not silent HTTP/1.1 fallback.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

> ###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

Reviewer: Not required for alpha, but I'd suggest considering metrics which can help monitoring this functionality.

Author: added

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> 

Reviewer: You removed `###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?` from here. Please stick to [the template](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

Author: added back.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

Query pods for `.spec.containers[*].livenessProbe.httpGet.protocol`,
`.spec.containers[*].readinessProbe.httpGet.protocol`, or

> `.spec.containers[*].startupProbe.httpGet.protocol` being set.

Reviewer: That's not quite useful. See my other question regarding metrics.

Author: Replaced with metrics-based monitoring using the existing prober_probe_total metric. Per SergeyKanzhelev's feedback  no new metric label is needed for alpha since the probe is uniquely identifiable from the pod spec. A dedicated protocol label can be considered for beta.

This approach reuses the existing `httpGet` path, port, and header semantics
that operators already know, and is naturally extensible to future protocols
(e.g., HTTP/3).

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1 (Optional)

As a platform engineer operating Kubernetes behind a TLS-terminating load
balancer, I want to configure liveness/readiness probes that speak HTTP/2
cleartext (h2c) to my app's main port, so that I don't have to run a second
HTTP/1.1-only port (with extra ingress rules and hardening) just to make probes
succeed.

#### Story 2 (Optional)

As an application developer whose service listens with HTTP/2 without TLS inside
the cluster, I want the kubelet to perform a real HTTP health check
(status code on a path) over h2c, so that I am not forced to use a `tcpSocket`
probe that only proves the port is open and does not confirm a valid HTTP
response.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

- `protocol: HTTP2` is only valid with `scheme: HTTP` (the default). This
  KEP scopes to cleartext h2c only.
- When `protocol: HTTP2`, `host` must be empty (probe always targets pod IP,
  same rationale as `grpc`). Can be relaxed later if needed.

### Risks and Mitigations

> 

Reviewer: With the previous statements, now you have empty risks section. Are there no risks at all?

Author: added

back to HTTP/1.1. Pods whose servers only accept HTTP/2 will experience
probe failures, which is the pre-feature behavior. No manual pod spec
changes are required.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

Pods that still carry `protocol: HTTP2` in their spec (admitted before rollback)
will resume h2c probing automatically. No data is lost or corrupted; the field
is purely declarative.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Yes. Unit tests in `pkg/apis/core/validation` and `pkg/kubelet/prober` cover:
- Gate off: `protocol` field silently dropped from new pods, preserved on
  existing pods for backward compatibility.
- Gate on then off: kubelet ignores the `protocol` field and falls back to
  HTTP/1.1.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

A spike in `prober_probe_total{result="failure"}` for pods using HTTP probes
after enabling the gate may indicate misconfigured h2c probes and could
warrant a rollback.

> 

Reviewer: You skipped `###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?` from [the template](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md#were-upgrade-and-rollback-tested-was-the-upgrade-downgrade-upgrade-path-tested). No need to answer it, but make sure it's there already, so you don't forget to update it for beta.

Author: The heading is already present in the KEP. Will fill in actual upgrade/downgrade test results for beta

HTTP GET over HTTP/2 cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c). When nil,
existing HTTP/1.1 behavior is preserved.

```go
// HTTPProtocol selects the wire protocol for the HTTP probe,
// independently of the URI scheme.
type HTTPProtocol string

const (
    // HTTPProtocolHTTP1 uses HTTP/1.1 (the existing default).
    HTTPProtocolHTTP1  HTTPProtocol = "HTTP1"
    // HTTPProtocolHTTP2 uses HTTP/2.
    // Currently, only cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c) is supported, and must be used with scheme HTTP.
    HTTPProtocolHTTP2 HTTPProtocol = "HTTP2"
)

type HTTPGetAction struct {
    Path        string             `json:"path,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=path"`
    Port        intstr.IntOrString `json:"port" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=port"`
    Host        string             `json:"host,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=host"`
    Scheme      URIScheme          `json:"scheme,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=scheme,casttype=URIScheme"`
    HTTPHeaders []HTTPHeader       `json:"httpHeaders,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,5,rep,name=httpHeaders"`
    // Protocol selects the wire protocol. Nil defaults to HTTP1.

>     // +optional

Reviewer 2: // +default="HTTP1"

Author: done, added , will update implementation pr also.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

> ## Summary

Reviewer 3: add some notes in summary on adoption of h2c and maturity of specs

Author: addressed

documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.
-->
This KEP makes h2c (HTTP/2 cleartext) a supported option for container health
probes, so operators are not forced to add a second HTTP/1.1-only probe port or
depend on a tcpSocket probe that only shows the port is open without a
meaningful HTTP response. Today, httpGet on plain TCP is effectively HTTP/1.1;
https can use HTTP/2 after TLS, but there is no first-class way to probe h2c
in the common “TLS terminates at the load balancer, in-cluster traffic is plain
HTTP/2” setup. The KEP defines an opt-in API and kubelet behavior and resolves
up front whether to extend httpGet or add a new probe type, including the
option to apply gRPC-style constraints (numeric port only, no host override) to

> avoid known pitfalls with httpGet today.

Reviewer 3: this comment is specifically for this sentence: 

> and resolves
up front whether to extend httpGet or add a new probe type, including the
option to apply gRPC-style constraints (numeric port only, no host override) to
avoid known pitfalls with httpGet today.

> ## Motivation

Author: addressed

  - Verify HTTP/2 is actually used on the wire (not HTTP/1.1 downgrade).

- `pkg/apis/core/validation`:
  - Valid `h2cGet` with numeric port, path, and headers → allowed.
  - Port out of range, named port → rejected.
  - `h2cGet` combined with `httpGet` → rejected (mutually exclusive).
  - `H2CContainerProbe` gate off → `h2cGet` field rejected at admission.

- `pkg/kubelet/prober`:
  - Gate off + `h2cGet` set → probe returns explicit failure (not silent HTTP/1.1).
  - `newProber` exposes h2c prober when gate is on.
  - Gate on/off toggle: object admitted with gate on, gate turned off → kubelet
    fails the probe clearly on next execution.

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit
-->

- `pkg/probe/http`: `<date>` - `<current test coverage>`
- `pkg/kubelet/prober`: `<date>` - `<current test coverage>`
- `pkg/apis/core/validation`: `<date>` - `<current test coverage>`

##### Integration tests

> 

Reviewer 4: As the implementation PR includes the tests can you update this?

Author: Updated with actual numbers from master.

kube-apiserver and kubelet and then update their pod specs.

**Downgrade:** If the feature gate is disabled after pods with `h2cGet` were
admitted, the kubelet will fail those probes explicitly (no silent fallback to
HTTP/1.1). Operators must remove `h2cGet` from pod specs before disabling the
gate, or accept that those pods will report probe failures until the gate is
re-enabled or the pod specs are updated.

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and nodes?
- How does an n-3 kubelet or kube-proxy without this feature available behave when this feature is used?
- How does an n-1 kube-controller-manager or kube-scheduler without this feature available behave when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

| Scenario | Behavior |
|----------|----------|

> | Old apiserver, new kubelet | `h2cGet` field is unknown to old apiserver -> rejected or dropped at admission before reaching kubelet. No silent HTTP/1.1 execution. |

Reviewer 4: The "Old apiserver, new kubelet" scenario violates Kubernetes version skew policy which requires kubelet must never be newer than kube-apiserver.

If you have added based on other KEPs, can you point me to it?

Author: thanks for pointing out that,  removed that row since it violates the version skew policy.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

###### What are other known failure modes?

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 4: @amritansh1502  Can you add this section explaining why `scheme: HTTP2_CLEARTEXT` was rejected and a new probe was added?

Author: Added Option C explaining why scheme: `HTTP2_CLEARTEXT `  was rejected.

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Option B: Extend `httpGet` with an `http2Cleartext` boolean

This approach would add an optional `http2Cleartext *bool` field to the existing
`HTTPGetAction` struct:

```go
type HTTPGetAction struct {
    Path           string             `json:"path,omitempty" ...`
    Port           intstr.IntOrString `json:"port" ...`
    Host           string             `json:"host,omitempty" ...`

>     Scheme         URIScheme          `json:"scheme,omitempty" ...`

Reviewer 5: Can we add the exercise of adding `Protocol` as a field, so HTTP2 and https will become h2c? how it will look like ? can we keep backwards compatibility?

Author: thanks for the question,here is the concrete exercise.
What Protocol as a field would look like:

```go
// +optional
Protocol HTTPProbeProtocol `json:"protocol,omitempty"`
```

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpGet:
    port: 8080
    protocol: HTTP2
```
  
**Backwards compatibility: yes, fully preserved.**
  -  protocol is omitempty , absent from all existing pod specs, old pods round-trip unchanged.
  -  Unset protocol-> HTTP/1.1, identical to today's behavior. No existing workload is affected.
  -  Gate off -  apiserver rejects protocol: HTTP2 at admission. Old kubelets that do not know the field ignore it safely.
  
  For a dedicated h2cGet type  : - 
  
 - httpGet has a host field that can redirect the probe away from podIP. For h2c this is a footgun, the grpc probe avoided it by having no host field at all. With Protocol, we need a new validation rule: "protocol: HTTP2 + host set ->  reject". That is adding a constraint to an existing field.

- httpGet allows named ports. protocol: HTTP2 + named port has no clear semantics and requires another validation rule.

-  scheme: HTTPS + protocol: HTTP2 is ambiguous , does that mean h2c over TLS? Needs explicit validation to reject or define. With a dedicated type the protocol is fixed by the field name and there is no ambiguity.

 The grpc probe set a precedent of a dedicated type to avoid these combinations, but I recognize that precedent can be revisited. The core question is whether the smaller API surface of Protocol is worth taking on the validation complexity in the h2c path
 Happy to go either direction ,  what is your preference?

Reviewer 5: I kind of like of having `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol`  or `Proto` as in the golang library https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.26.3:src/net/http/request.go;l=137  I think if we go this direction it should be a pointer, so the empty value is clear ... 

> The grpc probe set a precedent of a dedicated type to avoid these combinations, but I recognize that precedent can be revisited.

GRPC is a different beast, it goes on top of HTTP/2 also and has a different properties :/

> The core question is whether the smaller API surface of Protocol is worth taking on the validation complexity in the h2c path
Happy to go either direction , what is your preference?

I'm leaning towards adding `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol` , as we may want to have to add http/3 later and this paves the way, @thockin @liggitt @SergeyKanzhelev WDYT?

and kubelet (probe execution).

This approach reuses the existing `httpGet` path, port, and header semantics
that operators already know, and is naturally extensible to future protocols
(e.g., HTTP/3).

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a platform engineer operating Kubernetes behind a TLS-terminating load
balancer, I want to configure liveness/readiness probes that speak HTTP/2
cleartext (h2c) to my app's main port, so that I don't have to run a second
HTTP/1.1-only port (with extra ingress rules and hardening) just to make probes
succeed.

#### Story 2

As an application developer whose service listens with HTTP/2 without TLS inside
the cluster, I want the kubelet to perform a real HTTP health check
(status code on a path) over h2c, so that I am not forced to use a `tcpSocket`
probe that only proves the port is open and does not confirm a valid HTTP
response.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> - `protocol: HTTP2` is only valid with `scheme: HTTP` (the default). This

Reviewer 5: we can always add tls insecure support later ... is it complex to support https too?

Author: it is  not very complex, it would use the standard http2.Transport, but to keep this kep h2c centered i have not added that for now , also http/1.1 with tls already handles most http2 with tls servers.

Reviewer 5: fair enough to me

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

**HTTP/2 client dependency.** `golang.org/x/net/http2` is already transitively present in the kubelet, this adds a direct, documented use.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### API Design

A new `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol` field is added to `HTTPGetAction`. When
set to `HTTP2` (with the default `scheme: HTTP`), the kubelet performs the
HTTP GET over HTTP/2 cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c). When nil,
existing HTTP/1.1 behavior is preserved.

```go
// HTTPProbeProtocol selects the wire protocol for the HTTP probe,
// independently of the URI scheme.
type HTTPProbeProtocol string

const (
    // HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP1 uses HTTP/1.1 (the existing default).
    HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP1  HTTPProbeProtocol = "HTTP1"
    // HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2 uses HTTP/2 cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c).

>     // Only valid with scheme HTTP.

Reviewer 5: We are leaking the implementation details to the API, as this represent current state but we may have HTTP2 with https later too
What about something like
```suggestion
    // HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2 uses HTTP/2
    // Currently, only cleartext with prior knowledge (h2c) is supported, and must be used with scheme HTTP.
```

Author: fixed

`protocol` sub-field.

**Example probe manifest:**

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpGet:
    port: 8080
    path: /readyz
    protocol: HTTP2
    httpHeaders:
      - name: Custom-Header
        value: my-value
  initialDelaySeconds: 5
  periodSeconds: 10
```

**Validation rules** (enforced only when `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is on at
admission):

- `protocol` must be one of `HTTP1`, `HTTP2`, or nil (defaults to HTTP/1.1).
- `protocol: HTTP2` requires `scheme: HTTP` (the default). Setting
  `protocol: HTTP2` with `scheme: HTTPS` is rejected at admission.
- When `protocol: HTTP2` is set, `host` must be empty. The probe always
  targets `status.podIP`. This is rejected at admission with a descriptive
  error. `protocol: HTTP1` (or nil) does not restrict `host`.
- When the gate is off, any pod spec containing `protocol` in `httpGet` is
  rejected at admission with a descriptive error.

**Kubelet behavior:**

- When executing an `httpGet` probe with `protocol: HTTP2` and the
  `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is off, the kubelet returns a probe failure with an
  explicit error message (no silent HTTP/1.1 downgrade).
- The h2c client uses HTTP/2 with prior knowledge (no HTTP/1.1 Upgrade

>   negotiation), implemented via `golang.org/x/net/http2` transport.

Reviewer 5: Just a FYI , golang team is moving http2 to the std library https://github.com/golang/go/issues/67810

Author: thanks for pointer.

- A 2xx response code is success; any other response or connection error is
  failure, consistent with existing `httpGet` probe semantics.
- Probe timeout and period settings apply identically to other probe types.

#### Kubelet Probe Execution

In `pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go`, the kubelet reads the `Protocol` field:

```go
useHTTP2 := p.HTTPGet.Protocol != nil && *p.HTTPGet.Protocol == v1.HTTPProbeProtocolHTTP2
```

This boolean is passed to the HTTP prober to select the transport.

#### HTTP/2 Cleartext Transport

In `pkg/probe/http/http.go`, an h2c transport is created alongside the
existing HTTP/1.1 transport:

```go
h2cTransport := &http2.Transport{
    AllowHTTP: true,
    DialTLS: func(network, addr string, _ *tls.Config) (net.Conn, error) {
        return dialer.Dial(network, addr)
    },

> }

Reviewer 5: we should switch to the std library implementation , https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/net/http2/h2c

> Package h2c is deprecated.

```
To use HTTP/2 for unencrypted client requests:

tr := &http.Transport{}
tr.Protocols = new(http.Protocols)
tr.Protocols.SetUnencryptedHTTP2(true)
client := &http.Client{Transport: tr}
```

Author: added here , will push soon in implementation.

    HTTPHeaders []HTTPHeader       `json:"httpHeaders,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,5,rep,name=httpHeaders"`
    // Protocol selects the wire protocol. Nil defaults to HTTP/1.1.
    // +optional
    Protocol    *HTTPProbeProtocol `json:"protocol,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,6,opt,name=protocol,casttype=HTTPProbeProtocol"`
}
```

**`ProbeHandler` is unchanged**, the existing `httpGet` field carries the new
`protocol` sub-field.

**Example probe manifest:**

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpGet:
    port: 8080
    path: /readyz
    protocol: HTTP2
    httpHeaders:
      - name: Custom-Header
        value: my-value
  initialDelaySeconds: 5
  periodSeconds: 10
```

**Validation rules** (enforced only when `HTTPProbeProtocol` gate is on at
admission):

- `protocol` must be one of `HTTP1`, `HTTP2`, or nil (defaults to HTTP/1.1).
- `protocol: HTTP2` requires `scheme: HTTP` (the default). Setting
  `protocol: HTTP2` with `scheme: HTTPS` is rejected at admission.
- When `protocol: HTTP2` is set, `host` must be empty. The probe always
  targets `status.podIP`. This is rejected at admission with a descriptive
  error. `protocol: HTTP1` (or nil) does not restrict `host`.

> - When the gate is off, any pod spec containing `protocol` in `httpGet` is

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- When the gate is off, the protocol field is silently dropped during object creation (PrepareForCreate). For updates (PrepareForUpdate), the field is dropped unless it was already set in the existing object, ensuring existing pods are not corrupted during a rollback.
```

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/main/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#new-field-in-existing-api-version

Author: thanks, added, will modify soon in implementation.

real HTTP response on the workload port.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- This KEP does not alter gRPC probes or ingress behavior.
- This KEP does not introduce a new top-level probe handler type; it extends
  the existing `httpGet` handler with a `protocol` field.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a `Protocol *HTTPProbeProtocol` field to the existing `HTTPGetAction`
struct. When set to `H2C`, the kubelet performs the HTTP GET over HTTP/2
cleartext with prior knowledge instead of the default HTTP/1.1. When nil or
unset, behavior is unchanged (HTTP/1.1), preserving full backward
compatibility. The field is gated by the `HTTPProbeProtocol` feature gate on
both kube-apiserver (API validation) and kubelet (probe execution).

> This approach reuses the existing `httpGet` path, port, and header semantics

Reviewer 3: do we want to support all the existing things like host override for H2C? There is an opportunity to not support it for H2C if we want to.

Author: i think its good, will  add a validation rule to reject host override when protocol is set to HTTP2, same logic as gRPC probes always targeting pod IP.

(e.g., HTTP/2 over TLS without ALPN, HTTP/3) become new enum values rather
than new top-level probe types.

The alternative of adding a dedicated `h2cGet` probe handler was considered;
see [Alternatives](#alternatives) for details.

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a platform engineer operating Kubernetes behind a TLS-terminating load
balancer, I want to configure liveness/readiness probes that speak HTTP/2
cleartext (h2c) to my app's main port, so that I don't have to run a second
HTTP/1.1-only port (with extra ingress rules and hardening) just to make probes
succeed.

#### Story 2

As an application developer whose service listens with HTTP/2 without TLS inside
the cluster, I want the kubelet to perform a real HTTP health check
(status code on a path) over h2c, so that I am not forced to use a `tcpSocket`
probe that only proves the port is open and does not confirm a valid HTTP
response.

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Reviewer 3: so there will be no fallback to HTTP 1, correct? This need to be tested

Author: yes, there will be no fallback to HTTP1, i have already added e2e test case for this in implementation PR.
